Ruby SDK lightweight proposal (#63)
temporalio/proposals: ruby/sdk-lightweight.md

# Ruby SDK (lightweight overview)

This is a lightweight proposal for the Ruby SDK. The intention for this proposal is to give everyone
an end-to-end feel for the Ruby SDK. Many aspects of this proposal will probably change in the more
detailed versions later.

## Types

After many experiments we've decided to not proceed with Ruby typing at this point. This decision
will be revisited when Ruby's typing system matures to support non-basic use-cases.

## Defining an activity

Activities are defined as classes ([a very common practise](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html)
given that the language is object-oriented).

`sum_activity.rb`

```ruby
class SumActivity < Temporal::Activity
  # This will generate a default class-level stub SumActivity.execute to be used in workflows
  def execute(a, b)
    a + b
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Using plain methods as activities. This is not feasible in Ruby since non-namespaced methods
  are global without a clear way to reference them (would have to be `method(:my_activity)`)

- It is possible to allow multiple activities per class, for example:

```ruby

> class CalculatorActivity < Temporal::Activity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class CalculatorActivities < Temporal::Activity
```

  # Generate custom stubs to be used in workflows:
  # - CalculatorActivity.add
  # - CalculatorActivity.subtract
  activities :add, :subtract

  def add(a, b)
    a + b
  end

>   def subtract(a, b)

Reviewer 2: IF you have the time, can you show what heartbeating and cancellation look like?

    a - b
  end
end
```

## Defining a workflow

Similar to activities, workflows are also represented as classes.

`sum_workflow.rb`

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

class SumWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute(a, b)
    # - .execute! is a shorthand for .execute().await
    # - only positional arguments are supported (inline with other languages), keyword
    #   arguments are reserved for options

>     SumActivity.execute(a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer: Is this example supposed to be `execute!` - since there's no await?

Author: Yes, my bad 👍

>     SumActivity.execute(a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: Can you provide some background on how Ruby intercepts this call? I assume you do some runtime check to see whether it's an activity or not? So if I were calling a regular method, it'd still happen as normal correct? Are there concerns about users reading this and not knowing whether they are invoking an activity or just a normal method?

Author: As discussed on the call earlier — Ruby has class (static) methods and instance method that don't overlap:

```ruby
class Test
  def self.method_1
    puts "class method 1"
  end

  def self.method_2
    puts "class method 2"
  end

  def method_1
    puts "instance method 1"
  end

  def method_3
    puts "instance method 3"
  end
end

Test.method_1
# => class method 1

Test.method_2
# => class method 2

Test.method_3
# => undefined method `method_3' for Test:Class (NoMethodError)

t = Test.new

t.method_1
# => instance method 1

t.method_3
# => instance method 3

t.method_2
# => undefined method `method_2' for #<Test:0x000000012c025c38> (NoMethodError)
```

>     SumActivity.execute(a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: Can I see an example of starting multiple activities and waiting on the first to finish? Just curious how this looks in Ruby.

  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- For the same exact reasons it is not feasible to use non-namespaced methods for workflow

- Similar to activities it should be possible to define multiple workflows per class, however I

>   don't think this would be used often

Reviewer: I don't think it's advisable either. It becomes too easy to think you can change state in one workflow and read it in another which would cause all sorts of determinism issues.

So I think we should actually explicitly prevent this if we can

## Start a workflow

```ruby
require 'temporal/client'
require 'sum_workflow'

connection = Temporal::Connection.new('localhost:7233')
client = Temporal::Client.new(connection, namespace: 'demo')

# workflow is referenced with a stub, not just class

> handle = client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow.execute(1, 2), id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

Reviewer 2: Can you provide some background on how Ruby intercepts this call?

worker = Temporal::Worker.new(
  connection,
  namespace: 'demo',
  task_queue: 'demo',
  workflows: [SumWorkflow], # registers all workflows in the class
  activities: [SumActivity] # registers all activities in the class
)

worker.run
```

## Execute a child workflow

`parent_workflow.rb`

```ruby
class ChildWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute(name)
    "Hello, #{name}!"
  end
end

class ParentWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    ChildWorkflow.execute!('parent', id: 'id-2')
  end
end
```

## Async workflow

Calling `#execute` (rather than `#execute!`) on activities and workflows results in their
non-blocking execution.

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

class AsyncWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    activity_future = SumActivity.execute
    workflow_future = ParentWorkflow.execute

    workflow.wait_for(activity_future, workflow_future)

    activity_future.result # => 3
    workflow_future.result # => 'Hello, parent!'
  end
end
```

## Register signal and query handlers

`calculator_workflow.rb`

```ruby
class CalculatorWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    value = 0

    workflow.on_signal('add') do |val|
      value += val
    end

>     workflow.on_query('get_value') do

Reviewer: Did we already determine we were going with this way of registering handlers rather than as class methods? There are a lot of discoverability / client usability benefits to them being class methods, so I'd advocate for that if it's doable.

Author: There are downsides to using class methods as well, e.g. you won't get the benefit of using enclosed variables. But I'll see if that's feasible

Author: Added an alternative approach where these can be defined as methods instead

detailed versions later.

## Types

After many experiments we've decided to not proceed with Ruby typing at this point. This decision
will be revisited when Ruby's typing system matures to support non-basic use-cases.

## Defining an activity

Activities are defined as classes ([a very common practice](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html)
given that the language is object-oriented).

`sum_activity.rb`

```ruby
class SumActivity < Temporal::Activity
  # This will generate a default class-level stub SumActivity.execute to be used in workflows
  def execute(a, b)
    a + b
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Using plain methods as activities. This is not feasible in Ruby since non-namespaced methods
  are global without a clear way to reference them (would have to be `method(:my_activity)`)

- It is possible to allow multiple activities per class, for example:

`calculator_activities.rb`

```ruby
class CalculatorActivities < Temporal::Activity
  # Generate custom stubs on the class to be used in workflows:
  # - CalculatorActivities.add
  # - CalculatorActivities.subtract

>   activities :add, :subtract

Reviewer 2: For others knowledge, this can also have `, 'custom-activity-name' => :divide`

  def add(a, b)
    a + b
  end

  def subtract(a, b)
    a - b
  end
end
```

## Defining a workflow

Similar to activities, workflows are also represented as classes.

`sum_workflow.rb`

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

class SumWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute(a, b)
    # - .execute! is a shorthand for .execute().await
    # - only positional arguments are supported (inline with other languages), keyword
    #   arguments are reserved for options
    SumActivity.execute!(a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- For the same exact reasons it is not feasible to use non-namespaced methods for workflow

- Similar to activities it should be possible to define multiple workflows per class, however this
  will not be allowed to avoid a perception of a shared state between workflows

## Start a workflow

```ruby
require 'temporal/client'
require 'sum_workflow'

connection = Temporal::Connection.new('localhost:7233')
client = Temporal::Client.new(connection, namespace: 'demo')

# workflow is referenced via a stub, not just a class

> handle = client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow.execute(1, 2), id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

Reviewer 2: Can you confirm that if I called this activity method `add` or something, that this would be `SumWorkflow.add`? Meaning the activity invocation name will match the activity implementation name? (granted you may have to do a reverse map lookup to get the _actual_ string name if they overrode it)

Author: Yes, that's right, but this is a wrong line :)

Basically when invoking the workflow you would always have `SomeWorkflow.execute` method, but when calling an activity from a workflow the name would correspond to the name on your activity class:

```ruby
class MyActivities < Temporal::Activity
  activities :add, :subtract, 'custom-activity' => :divide
  ...
end

class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    MyActivities.add!(1, 2)

    # non-! version returns a future
    future = MyActivities.subtract(42, 10)
    
    # Schedules an activity with a type "custom-activity"
    MyActivities.divide!(4, 2)
  end
end
```

handle.result # => 3
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Starting a foreign workflow from a string name

```ruby
client.start_workflow(Temporal::Workflow.execute('my.workflow', 1, 2), id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')
```

- Starting a foreign workflow with the help of a stub

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  workflow 'my.workflow'
end

client.start_workflow(MyWorkflow.execute('my.workflow', 1, 2), id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')
```

## Start a worker

```ruby
require 'temporal/worker'
require 'sum_workflow'
require 'sum_activity'
require 'calculator_activities'

connection = Temporal::Connection.new('localhost:7233')
worker = Temporal::Worker.new(
  connection,
  namespace: 'demo',
  task_queue: 'demo',

>   workflows: [SumWorkflow], # registers all workflows in the class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  workflows: [SumWorkflow], # registers each class as a workflow
```

Because, after discussion, a workflow class can only have one workflow. And, after our discussion, we decided to always require the entrypoint to be `execute` instead of allowing that to be customized since it's inline w/ normal Ruby nomenclature and there's no benefit in customizing it.

)

worker.run
```

#### Alternative approach

To support passing additional context to the activity classes a worker can be initialised with an
instance of the activity class (only available for activities).

```ruby
redis = Redis.new('localhost:6379')

Temporal::Worker.new(
  ...,
  activities: [CalculatorActivities.new(redis)]
)
```

*NOTE: This however will come with a heavy warning — the activity must be strictly thread-safe as
the provided instance will be called from multiple threads (and possibly at the same exact time).*

## Activity heartbeats & cancellations

```ruby
class MyActivity < Temporal::Activity
  def execute
    loop do
      sleep 1
      activity.heartbeat('ping')
    end
  rescue Temporal::Error::ActivityCancelled
    raise 'this activity is cancelled'
  end
end
```

This approach uses `Thread#raise` that will eject the execution out of the current context. In cases
where this is not acceptable we will allow to either wrap a critical code in an `activity.shield`
block (that will not raise until the block has executed) or opt-out of this default behaviour
altogether and use `activity.cancelled?` flag to determine when an activity was cancelled.

> Here is what it will look like from a workflow perspective:

Reviewer 2: We will have to have a (maybe separate) discussion about workflow cancellation and its cascading effects. We can't use `Thread#raise` in workflows so you very well may want to turn to something like https://docs.temporal.io/typescript/cancellation-scopes. But for activity cancellation, this looks perfect.

    workflow.wait_for { value >= 42 }
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approach

To provide extra flexibility in handling signals and queries we will allow to defined signal and
query handlers as methods:

```ruby
class CalculatorWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Both signal and query handlers can be defined as Symbols (when the name matches the
  # method) or a Hash when name is different (or can not be used as a method name)
  signals :add, 'my.signal.subtract' => :subtract
  queries :get_value, 'my.query.value' => :get_value

  # It is preferable in this case to initialize the values before the execution to
  # support starting a workflow with a signal
  def initialize
    @value = 0
  end

  def execute
    workflow.wait_for { value >= 42 }
  end

  private

  def add(val)
    @value += val
  end

  def subtract(val)
    @value -= val
  end

  def get_value
    @value
  end
end
```

## Signal and query a workflow

```ruby
require 'calculator_workflow'

connection = Temporal::Connection.new('localhost:7233')
client = Temporal::Client.new(connection, namespace: 'demo')

handle = client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow.execute(1, 2), id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

> handle.signal('add', 34)

Reviewer 2: You support `client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow.execute(1, 2), ...` so why not support `handle.signal(SumWorkflow.add(34))` here? (of course still supporting the string option for when you don't have the method handy)

Reviewer 2: I definitely want to avoid things like underscore prefixes and pieces like that. Also remember we want these things to be typed some day in the future.

# Ruby SDK (lightweight overview)

This is a lightweight proposal for the Ruby SDK. The intention for this proposal is to give everyone
an end-to-end feel for the Ruby SDK. Many aspects of this proposal will probably change in the more
detailed versions later.

## Types

After many experiments we've decided to not proceed with Ruby typing at this point. This decision
will be revisited when Ruby's typing system matures to support non-basic use-cases.

## Defining an activity

Activities are defined as classes ([a very common practice](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html)
given that the language is object-oriented). Activities are expected to implement an `#execute`
method that will be called to execute an activity.

`sum_activity.rb`

```ruby
# The activity class name will be used as activity name unless overridden
class SumActivity < Temporal::Activity
  # Optionally override the name

>   activity 'sum-activity'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  activity_name 'sum-activity'
```

  # return value of the #execute method will be used as an activity result
  def execute(a, b)
    a + b
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Using plain methods as activities. This is not feasible in Ruby since non-namespaced methods
  are global without a clear way to reference them (would have to be `method(:my_activity)`)

- It is possible to allow multiple activities per class, however we've decided against this because
  there's an extra complexity to the invocation (extra argument representing the method) and it
  complicates the use of class-level "decorators" (e.g. for specifying activity name or other
  options)

## Defining a workflow

Similar to activities, workflows are also represented as classes.

`sum_workflow.rb`

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

# Similar to activities the class name will be used as a workflow name unless overridden
class SumWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Optionally override the name

>   workflow 'sum-workflow'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  workflow_name 'sum-workflow'
```

  end
end
```

## Async workflow

Ruby doesn't have a standard (or at least very popular) framework for async execution of the code.
Because of this we can assume that most Ruby engineers using the SDK won't be immediately familiar
with writing async code. Because of this we have decided to make async execution opt-in, keeping
everything synchronous by default.

We have also chosen an eager execution pattern where any `async` block is started immediately and
performed until blocked before proceeding with the execution. This is a bit easier to get a hold of
and eliminates the risk of forgetting to actually start an async block. However this means that
we'll need to find a solution for unhandled promise rejections, which we'll cover separately in a
more detailed workflow proposal.

We will introduce a helper method `async` to execute a block of code asynchronously:

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

class AsyncWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    activity_promise = async { workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, 1, 2) }
    workflow_promise = async { workflow.execute_workflow(ChildWorkflow, 'parent') }

    # Block execution until both promises are resolved

>     workflow.wait_for(activity_promise, workflow_promise)

Reviewer 3: Is this still going to be available, or do we only want `async.all` and `async.any`?

Reviewer 3: We also discussed `all` returning a promise that resolves with an array of results.

Author: Sorry, this is outdated. Pushed new version

    activity_promise.result # => 3
    workflow_promise.result # => 'Hello, parent!'
  end
end
```

A bit more involved example:

```ruby
class AnotherAsyncWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    promise_1 = async { wait_and_sum(1, 2, delay: 10) }
    promise_2 = async { wait_and_sum(3, 4, delay: 15) }

    # The same exact method can be called in a blocking fashion
    wait_and_sum(5, 6, delay: 5) # => 11

    # Block execution until any promise is resolved

>     async.wait_for(async.any(promise_1, promise_2))

Reviewer 3: In one of our conversations, these combinators returned promises. Doesn't look like this is reflected in the proposal.

    # Because of the longest delay this would block until resolved
    promise_2.result # => 7
  end

  private

  def wait_and_sum(a, b, delay:)
    workflow.sleep(delay)
    workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b)
  end
end
```

## Activity heartbeats & cancellations

This approach uses `Thread#raise` that will eject the execution out of the current context. In cases
where this is not acceptable we will allow to either wrap a critical code in an `activity.shield`
block (that will not raise until the block has executed) or opt-out of this default behaviour
altogether and use `activity.cancelled?` flag to determine when an activity was cancelled.

```ruby
class MyActivity < Temporal::Activity
  def execute
    loop do
      sleep 1
      activity.heartbeat('ping')
    end
  rescue Temporal::Error::ActivityCancelled
    raise 'this activity is cancelled'
  end
end
```

Here is what it will look like from a workflow perspective:

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Activity
  def execute
    # Async blocks double as cancellation scopes
    promise = async { workflow.execute_activity(LongRunningActivity) }

    workflow.sleep(10)

    # Blocking call

>     promise.cancel

Reviewer 3: You'd want to "race" between the activity and the timer to avoid unhandled rejection.
I'd replace this example to avoid suggesting this pattern.

  end
end
```

*NOTE: While `promise.cancel` is blocking, it can be wrapped in an `async` block for non-blocking
cancellations.*

#### Alternative approaches

- Overall using `Thread#raise` is considered bad practice because it might raise in the
  middle of some process. We might want to consider opting in to this behaviour instead

## Workflow cancellations

To handle external workflow cancellations (requested by a client or another workflow) we will use a
similar approach to activities. By default the cancellation will attempt to cancel all currently
executing fibers. To protect critical functionality from cancellations a `workflow.shield` method
can be used. In which case cancellation will raise after the block is executed:

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Activity
  def execute
    workflow.execute_activity(SomeActivity)

    workflow.shield do
      promise_1 = async { workflow.execute_activity(AnotherActivity) }
      promise_2 = async { workflow.execute_activity(SomeOtherActivity) }

>       workflow.wait_for(promise_1, promise_2)

Reviewer 3: Also looks outdated

    end
  rescue Temporal::Error::WorkflowCancelled
    ...
  end
end
```

## Register signal and query handlers

`calculator_workflow.rb`

```ruby
class CalculatorWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Both signal and query handlers can be defined as Symbols (when the name matches the
  # method) or a Hash when name is different (or cannot be used as a method name)
  signals :add, 'my.signal.subtract' => :subtract

>   queries :get_value, 'my.query.value' => :get_value

Reviewer 3: Needs to be updated with recent conclusions.

# Ruby SDK (lightweight overview)

This is a lightweight proposal for the Ruby SDK. The intention for this proposal is to give everyone
an end-to-end feel for the Ruby SDK. Many aspects of this proposal will probably change in the more
detailed versions later.

## Types

After many experiments we've decided to not proceed with Ruby typing at this point. This decision
will be revisited when Ruby's typing system matures to support non-basic use-cases.

## Defining an activity

Activities are defined as classes ([a very common practice](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html)
given that the language is object-oriented). Activities are expected to implement an `#execute`
method that will be called to execute an activity.

`sum_activity.rb`

```ruby
# The activity class name will be used as activity name unless overridden
class SumActivity < Temporal::Activity
  # Optionally override the name

>   activity_name 'sum-activity'

Reviewer 3: Had the same thoughts, can be added later

>   activity_name 'sum-activity'

Reviewer 2: This is correct. We encourage single struct arguments everywhere. So maybe `activity_param` as a shortcut would help. The break can be (mostly) clean on activity definition, but worker invocation needs to be able to call activities from other languages and we often allow people to make stubs of those other-language activities in order to have typing help during invocation (so maybe doesn't apply here _yet_).

>   activity_name 'sum-activity'

Reviewer: The stubbing is probably the best reason.

We should definitely make sure to drive people towards one arg in every other situation, though.

Perhaps we could have some methodology for declaring stubs which is specific about them being external, and only allow more than one arg there, but I can see how that starts to make for perhaps too broad of an API surface for middling benefit.

>   activity_name 'sum-activity'

Author: @cretz great suggestion on specifying serializers/deserializers, I had exactly the same approach in mind.

On the subject of single vs multiple arguments — while it makes perfect sense I think that it opens up more questions. The main one being — what should that single argument type be? Ruby doesn't have a good default solution. A Hash (dictionary) is easily serializable/deserializable to JSON, however it needs to support have variable value types (which RBS has, but Sorbet doesn't). Ruby's `Struct` doesn't have any native serialization support (unless you convert it to Hash first) and doesn't have any typing support (unless you use Sorbet's proprietary `T::Struct`, but that's a different data type altogether). Right now it feels like the extra cost for developers will be outweighing the benefits.

A good example here is Protobuf where they had to develop a whole new data type to support serialization and type checks. I wonder if we want to have this built in the SDK or simply be flexible enough that someone can built the support for Protobuf (or JSON, `T::Struct` or whatever else) on top of our SDKs.

I also feel like this is something that needs to be agreed on across all SDKs and added as a separate proposal. Using a single SDK to drive this change has the risk of excluding some people who might have an opinion on it from the conversation.

  # return value of the #execute method will be used as an activity result
  def execute(a, b)
    a + b
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Using plain methods as activities. This is not feasible in Ruby since non-namespaced methods
  are global without a clear way to reference them (would have to be `method(:my_activity)`)

- It is possible to allow multiple activities per class, however we've decided against this because
  there's an extra complexity to the invocation (extra argument representing the method) and it
  complicates the use of class-level "decorators" (e.g. for specifying activity name or other
  options)

## Defining a workflow

Similar to activities, workflows are also represented as classes.

`sum_workflow.rb`

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

# Similar to activities the class name will be used as a workflow name unless overridden
class SumWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Optionally override the name
  workflow_name 'sum-workflow'

  def execute(a, b)
    # - Positional arguments passed to activity (inline with other SDKs)
    # - Keyword arguments are reserved for options
    # - This call is blocking

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 4: Also, because you're going with one-activity-per-class (yay!), it's great if the activity author specifies the timeouts and retry policies rather than the caller, because the activity author is the expert (often they are two different people). In that world, the caller only overrides them in in rare cases, which may make it easier for you to stomach an explicit options class rather than the pattern of keyword-args-as-options.

FYI, if you're not aware, Temporal is working on adding ExecuteAtMostOnce vs ExecuteAtLeastOnce annotations to the SDKs.
(see https://temporalio.notion.site/Replay-roadmap-highlights-print-version-632692bcd46549719f91bb9b7ac859bd "shorthand retry policies")

This is another aspect that pushes us toward wanting more stuff declared on the activity.

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: Due to how Temporal API works and that activities can be called across languages, retry policies and timeouts must be caller-time values. You can't know a Ruby activity's retry policy when called from Go.

However, we encourage people to use normal code sharing practices so _they_ can centralize their retry policies. So if you're a Ruby-only shop you can put them on this class and reference them, but if you're not maybe you'll have them in a proto contract or just known on the caller side.

Most users agree that definition-time activity options make sense, but the core primitives of Temporal don't support that yet.

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: We are trying to keep from having two different ways to provide the options to an activity at this low level. But this is really easy with just a constant on the activity they can reference. We are also trying to keep Ruby from being special here compared to all other SDKs.

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Author: @drewhoskins-stripe I agree with you on this and in fact this is how the current SDK behaves allowing you to specify it on the Activity class and then optionally override when calling an Activity. This is a step away from the other SDKs, but I think that the key is extensibility of the SDK allowing you to easily add support for this behaviour (for example via an interceptor) and maybe publish it as a gem.

Using a single class to combine timeouts and retry policy options does make it easier (although admittedly forces more typing):

```ruby
workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, timeouts: Temporal::Timeouts.new(start_to_close: 10), retry_policy: Temoral::RetryPolicy.new(...))
```

@cretz @bergundy @Sushisource what do you think? 

@cretz I think the cross-language argument doesn't really apply here because these calls similarly can't know remote argument/result serialization. But that doesn't mean we don't want to support it for same-language use-cases and via a stub for remote.

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: > what do you think?

Does Ruby offer a splat/spread operator? I don't think there is much value in a "Timeouts" grouping. But there may be value in an "ActivityOptions" grouping that you can splat, clone/override, etc.

> I think the cross-language argument doesn't really apply here because these calls similarly can't know remote argument/result serialization.

To clarify, we are talking about definition-site activity options. Invocation from non-Ruby won't have access to those options. You might as well just make them a constant on the class and reference them at call time instead of having it built in. I don't think there is enough benefit in having an official Temporal way for declaration-site options that only half-work and have no server support and make the Ruby SDK special.

I think tackling declaration-site options is a reasonable thing to do holistically, not shoehorned into a not-yet-built SDK. We know we need call-site options anyways, lets get that built first for parity purposes.

>     workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should group timeouts. They are often unrelated to each other. It's not like a "timeout policy".

    # - Starting an activity by its name rather than a class
    # - The result of this activity will be used as a workflow result (Ruby standard)
    workflow.execute_activity('sum-activity', a, b, start_to_close_timeout: 10)
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- For the same exact reasons it is not feasible to use non-namespaced methods for workflow

- Similar to activities it should be possible to define multiple workflows per class, however this
  will not be allowed to avoid a perception of a shared state between workflows and allow for
  class-level "decorators"

## Start a workflow

```ruby
require 'temporal/client'
require 'sum_workflow'

# Connections are eager and a lazy option will be introduced later
connection = Temporal::Connection.connect('localhost:7233')
client = Temporal::Client.new(connection, namespace: 'demo')

# workflow is referenced by the class

> handle = client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow, 1, 2, id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

Reviewer 4: task_queue: not sure if your intent here is to show the most common pattern.
With Nexus, temporal is moving in the direction of hiding the task queue from the caller wherever possible.
Even without Nexus though, it seems best if the workflow provides its own namespace and task queue whenever possible.  Can we do that?  I think only when you're calling indirectly via the name (without the class) would you strictly need to provide a task queue.  And I expect calling via class to be the 95% case.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can reasonably do this. Many users of the client don't even have the workflow definition present. All of our SDKs require task queue at workflow start time and I don't think Ruby should be unique here. Also, it is quite common for the same workflow to be on different task queues (e.g. task queue versioning).

As with other parts, users are encouraged to build on top of these primitives to wrap/centralize this stuff though. So maybe you have a static start method on your workflow class for Ruby users that knows the task queue to use.

Reviewer 4: What I would recommend would be a way for a workflow/activity author to provide a default configuration that's usable by its in-language clients.  If clients can't use those defaults for whatever reason, they have to provide.  This could be two separate caller methods.  Many shops will be able to exclusively use the nice one.

Just because everybody can't have nice things doesn't mean most people can't.  And it'd be better for us to provide it than for everybody to have to roll their own--Maxim was saying as much at Replay.

Reviewer 2: I think that may be a general discussion for all SDKs. I don't think just Ruby should deviate at this time.

Author: Agree with both points — it's a very useful property to have (and definitely made the current SDK much easier to use for many engineers) and also that this should come as a cross-SDK proposal.

@cretz are you aware of any ongoing efforts to propose this?

Reviewer 2: I am not aware of any, but I'd of course support it. It'd need server side assistance and the upcoming Nexus framework expects to be able to support that as well (where the Nexus handler decides these options, not the caller).

> handle.result # => 3

Reviewer 3: I'd punt on this for now, can be added later

> handle.result # => 3

Reviewer 2: This is a poll and a "wait for" or timeout or whatever makes sense. Unsure about naming. In other dynamic languages that do have async support we've just called it `result`, but if it's important to have a verb in front, no problem.

> handle.result # => 3

Author: This seems less important at the high level. The main points are:

1. There should be a way to check workflow status from a handle without waiting for it to finish
2. We might need to rename the `#result` method to indicate that it's polling/blocking

```

#### Alternative approaches

- Starting a foreign workflow from a string name

```ruby

> client.start_workflow('sum-workflow', 1, 2, id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

Author: We had this discussion with Temporal and decided that the SDK should be less opinionated here, but instead have the flexibility for someone to build the "nice" version on top of it. This of course has the downside of the "nice" version becoming more popular than the default version, but should that happen Temporal can choice to maintain both.

```

- Starting a foreign workflow with the help of a stub

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Optionally override the name of the workflow
  workflow_name 'my.workflow'
end

client.start_workflow(MyWorkflow, 1, 2, id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')
```

## Start a worker

```ruby
require 'temporal/worker'
require 'sum_workflow'
require 'some_other_workflow'
require 'sum_activity'
require 'some_other_activity'

connection = Temporal::Connection.connect('localhost:7233')
worker = Temporal::Worker.new(

>   connection,

Reviewer 3: > worker is created from a client (which it essentially is in all of our SDKs except unfortunately this one)

Only Go and Python.
I'm really on the fence here TBH, I like the simplicity of only having a `Client` and a `Worker` but OTOH like having the flexibility and "correctness" of this separate layer.

>   connection,

Reviewer 2: And Java whose `WorkerFactory` accepts a client. TS of course can't share the client at this time.

>   connection,

Reviewer 3: True, but the `WorkflowClient` accepts a `WorkflowServiceStubs` instance so this layer not completely hidden.

>   connection,

Author: We had a few discussions on this, I propose we revisit this part at a later point when we have more details (such as the configuration, converters and interceptors) crystallised

  namespace: 'demo',
  task_queue: 'demo',
  workflows: [SumWorkflow, SomeOtherWorkflow],
  activities: [SumActivity, SomeOtherActivity]

> )

Reviewer 2: I think it's gonna be important to provide an `activity_runner` here which defaults to `ThreadPoolRunner` or something. I think it's really important to be able to let people make async activities in their favorite async frameworks. Arguably it could be a per-activity runner instead of a per-worker activity runner.

Being able to run thousands of workflows and thousands of activities on just a couple of threads is very nice for scale.

Reviewer 3: I see where you're coming from but I would punt on this for now.

Author: I'll make sure there's a clear separation of the runner, which we can later expose as a configurable argument. But it's probably something that we don't need in the lightweight proposal :)

worker.run
```

#### Alternative approach

To support passing additional context to the activity classes a worker can be initialised with an
instance of the activity class (only available for activities).

```ruby
redis = Redis.new('localhost:6379')

Temporal::Worker.new(
  ...,
  activities: [CalculatorActivities.new(redis)]
)
```

> *NOTE: This however will come with a heavy warning — the activity must be strictly thread-safe as

Reviewer 2: This warning should probably exist for _all_ activities, not just ones they instantiate. Because we should be instantiating the class-activities at registration time too. This is so the user can use (thread-safe) fields of the class across activities if they so choose.

Basically, the lifetime of all activity classes should be at least the worker level, whether we instantiate them or they do. It'd be confusing if class state was per-activity for one way of registering and per-worker for another.

Reviewer 3: Wondering we should require the user to instantiate their own classes, it eliminates questions of "when / where is this instantiated" and makes it so there's a single way to register activities.

Author: If we expect the Worker to instantiate client provided activity classes at the registration time then there is no need for accepting classes and we can just accept instances. My biggest worry is that we're exposing every single Ruby SDK user to the thread-safety issues that they might not be very familiar with (Ruby is known for not being 100% thread safe, which is the main reason for the Global Interpreter Lock).

By accepting a class rather than an instance I was hoping that we can create a new Activity instance only on a dedicated thread when processing an activity task therefore making it much easier and safer for the majority. If we don't care about this then I'm happy with only accepting instances (I don't like the discrepancy with workflows, but I can probably live with it)

Reviewer 2: I think accepting classes makes plenty of sense and reads better, with the option of accepting instances too for advanced use.

the provided instance will be called from multiple threads (and possibly at the same exact time).*

## Execute a child workflow

`parent_workflow.rb`

```ruby
class ChildWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute(name)
    "Hello, #{name}!"
  end
end

class ParentWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute

>     workflow.execute_child_workflow(ChildWorkflow, 'parent', id: 'id-2')

Reviewer 4: FWIW, at Stripe, execute takes a context variable explicitly.  This makes it easier for folks to discover the stuff they're supposed to interact with.  Putting those methods on the workflow gets confusing because there are a bunch of other methods you're not supposed to use.
I'm not sure it's a good idea here without static type declarations but figured I'd mention it as an option.

Reviewer 2: In theory, at least with all of our other SDKs, all methods on `workflow` package/module/whatever are for use in the workflow. So if they are unsure what to interact with, "just look at the workflow module". If there are methods you are not supposed to use in workflows, they shouldn't be in that module.

There is definitely a lot of discussion about the pros/cons of implicit vs explicit contexts.

Author: @drewhoskins-stripe not sure where the miscommunication happened, but all the public methods (without exceptions) on the `workflow` context will be available for general use. This is true in the current SDK as well.

Passing the context explicitly suggests that you would define these methods on the `Temporal::Workflow` which then has the potential of colliding with user-defined methods and also creates inconsistency in the API (calling a class vs a string name vs utility method such as `now` and `sleep`)

  end
end
```

## Async workflow

Ruby doesn't have a standard (or at least very popular) framework for async execution of the code.
Because of this we can assume that most Ruby engineers using the SDK won't be immediately familiar
with writing async code. Because of this we have decided to make async execution opt-in, keeping
everything synchronous by default.

We have also chosen an eager execution pattern where any `async` block is started immediately and
performed until blocked before proceeding with the execution. This is a bit easier to get a hold of
and eliminates the risk of forgetting to actually start an async block. However this means that
we'll need to find a solution for unhandled promise rejections, which we'll cover separately in a
more detailed workflow proposal.

We will introduce a helper method `async` to execute a block of code asynchronously:

```ruby
require 'sum_activity'

> class AsyncWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow

Reviewer 4: 👍

  def execute
    activity_promise = async { workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, 1, 2) }

>     workflow_promise = async { workflow.execute_child_workflow(ChildWorkflow, 'parent') }

Reviewer 2: Yes, inside the block itself is synchronous (unless you nest `async`). So `execute_child_workflow` twice in the same async block just means that the whole block is async/background, but the second won't execute until after the first is complete.

>     workflow_promise = async { workflow.execute_child_workflow(ChildWorkflow, 'parent') }

Author: Yep, what Chad said ^. Basically:

```async
async do
  workflow.execute_activity(Activity1)
  
  promise_1 = async do
    workflow.execute_activity(Activity2)
    workflow.execute_activity(Activity3)
  end

  promise_2 = async { workflow.execute_activity(Activity4) }
  
  async.all(promise_1, promise_2).await
end
```

This will not start `Activity2` and `Activity4` until `Activity1` has completed. Then start `Activity2` and `Activity4` at the same time, but not `Activity3`. After `Activity2` is completed, `Activity3` will get executed. And the whole outer `async` block will complete after all activities have completed. Hope that makes sense

    # Block execution until both promises are resolved
    activity_result, workflow_result = async.all(activity_promise, workflow_promise).await

    activity_result # => 3
    workflow_result # => 'Hello, parent!'
    
    promise = async { workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, 3, 4) }
    
    # individual promises can also be waited on
    result = promise.await
    
    result # => 7
  end
end
```

A bit more involved example:

```ruby
class AnotherAsyncWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    promise_1 = async { wait_and_sum(1, 2, delay: 15) }
    promise_2 = async { wait_and_sum(3, 4, delay: 10) }

    # The same exact method can be called in a blocking fashion
    wait_and_sum(5, 6, delay: 5) # => 11

    # Block execution until any promise is resolved
    async.any(promise_1, promise_2).await

    # Returns immediately because it will already be resolved (shorter delay)
    promise_2.result # => 7

    # This would block until the promise is resolved (longer delay)
    promise_1.result # => 3
  end

  private

  def wait_and_sum(a, b, delay:)
    workflow.sleep(delay)
    workflow.execute_activity(SumActivity, a, b)
  end
end
```

> Methods `async.all` and `async.any` return promises themselves, so they can be used just like the

Reviewer 2: Note that Python combines these to just [wait](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-task.html#asyncio.wait) and has an option for whether you want first completed or all. This is important because there's actually multiple wait styles:

* first success - first one finishes successfully or _all_ finish unsuccessfully (JS equiv to `Promise.any`)
* first completed - first one finishes or fails (JS equiv to `Promise.race`)
* all - all complete

You can keep the "any" and "all" separate, but you need to define how you handle a promise completed with a failure in the "any" case and you may need another "any" for the alternative approach

Reviewer 3: `all` equivalent in JS is `Promise.all`, it also has `Promise.allSettled` that doesn't throw when a promise is rejected.
I find the JS approach simpler but don't have a strong preference, up to @antstorm to decide.

Reviewer: +1 to different top level names. Easier to scan and read at a glance.

Author: Right now it's important to agree that `async.all` means "all finished" (completed or failed) and `async.any` means "first finished" (completed or failed).

I agree that top-level names are the best for readability and can be added later for more granular control. But overall this doesn't feel very important since we have `async.await_for` that can be used instead.

promises returned by an `async {}` call.

Also worth noting that `async {}` calls can be nested to model more complex business logic.

## Activity heartbeats & cancellations

> This approach uses `Thread#raise` that will eject the execution out of the current context. In cases

Reviewer 4: 👍

where this is not acceptable we will allow to either wrap a critical code in an `activity.shield`
block (that will not raise until the block has executed) or opt-out of this default behaviour

> altogether and use `activity.cancelled?` flag to determine when an activity was cancelled.

Reviewer 5: I worry about the use of `.canceled?` because when the bit gets flipped happens at unexpected times (only when heartbeating is done). I've seen a lot of confusion around this already in all SDKs, but I think the confusion would be heightened if the workflow author was able to check this bit because it would give them a false sense that it may be updated more frequently.

Reviewer 2: While `Thread.raise` is a good way to signal cancellation, people also need to be able to know their activity is in a cancelled state. The presence of this boolean is not the same as suggesting it be the primary way to determine cancellation.

Author: Also worth noting that with the Rust Core the cancellation mechanism is abstracted away from heartbeating (still coupled internally, but this is not exposed to the SDK itself). So in the future cancellations might get propagated to a non-heartbeating code, so we do need to have some mechanism in place to check the state of an activity from within.

```ruby
class LongRunningActivity < Temporal::Activity

>   def execute

Reviewer 2: > the cursoring

Can you clarify what you mean here? Of course an activity is just any user code they want, we only provide helpers for cancellation, heartbeating, and obtaining some activity info. That means basically everything you can do in Ruby is supported.

    10.times do
      sleep 1
      activity.heartbeat('ping')
    end
  rescue Temporal::Error::ActivityCancelled
    raise 'this activity is cancelled'
  end
end
```

Here is what it will look like from a workflow perspective:

```ruby
class InnerCancelWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    # the block supplies an optional argument

>     async do |outer_promise|

Reviewer 2: I know this is just a param name, but I wonder if we want to call this a "cancel scope" instead of a "promise". They can't do anything but cancel this, right?

Reviewer 3: 👍  I'd rather this only be a cancellation "handle" an not give access to the promise which could lead to deadlock if used incorrectly.

Author: I remember that Maxim felt strong about this one, but I think we can punt on it for now, especially since it doesn't really affect the API much

      async do
        workflow.sleep(30)
        outer_promise.cancel
      end

      # One of these blocking activities will end up getting cancelled 
      #   unless they all finish within 30 seconds
      workflow.execute_activity(LongRunningActivity)
      workflow.execute_activity(LongRunningActivity)

>       workflow.execute_activity(LongRunningActivity)

Reviewer 5: I assume these must raise when canceled because there will not be an available return result. Should that error type be called out like in other parts of the proposal?

Author: Unless these activities implement some custom cancellation handling they will raise `Temporal::Error::ActivityCancelled`. This will bubble up to the outer `async` block and raise in the workflow. Based on the error super class we can treat this as workflow cancellation (@bergundy please keep me honest here)

    end.await
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approaches

- Overall using `Thread#raise` is considered bad practice because it might raise in the
  middle of some process. We might want to consider opting in to this behaviour instead

> ## Workflow cancellations

Reviewer 4: Not sure where to bring this up, but kinda related, the default for temporal-ruby when the workflow implementation throws is to fail the workflow, whereas in Java, the workflow keeps retrying unless you specifically throw a fatal error.  
I'm guessing we'll switch since we're moving to rust-core but wanted to double check.  I would be in favor of defaulting to retrying since that unlocks the ability to deploy code to fix workflows and seems more inline with temporal's ethos.

To handle external workflow cancellations (requested by a client or another workflow) we will use a
similar approach to activities. By default the cancellation will attempt to cancel all currently
executing fibers. To protect critical functionality from cancellations a `workflow.shield` method
can be used. In which case cancellation will raise after the block is executed:

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Activity
  def execute
    # Can get cancelled
    workflow.execute_activity(NonCriticalActivity)

    # This block will delay any cancellations until it is finished
    async(shield: true) do
      workflow.execute_activity(CriticalActivity)
      workflow.execute_activity(OtherCriticalActivity)
    end.await
    
    # Can get cancelled
    workflow.execute_activity(AnotherNonCriticalActivity)
  rescue Temporal::Error::WorkflowCancelled

>     ...

Reviewer 5: Do you expect that more activities can be run here as well? I do like that creating a canceled context does not seem to be necessary. I've seen that abstraction be confusing to workflow authors.

Reviewer 2: > Do you expect that more activities can be run here as well?

Yes, this is a feature in all Temporal SDKs. But note, cancellation is a reported state not an event from the Temporal server. So you can't get a second cancellation. And if this error is not bubbled out, the workflow won't be considered cancelled.

  end
end
```

## Register signal and query handlers

`calculator_workflow.rb`

```ruby
class CalculatorWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  # Both signal and query handlers can be defined as Symbols (when the name matches the
  # method) or overriden when the name is different (or cannot be used as a method name)
  signal :add
  signal :subtract, name: 'my.signal.subtract'
  
  query :value # can use a getter here

>   query :get_previous_value, name: 'my.query.previous_value'

Reviewer 2: We need to consider how to provide "deserialization types" to these too, though it can be later on.

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: Very good point, yes 👍

  # It is preferable in this case to initialize the values before the execution to
  # support starting a workflow with a signal
  def initialize
    @value = 0
    @previous_value = 0
  end

  def execute
    async.await_for { @value >= 42 }
  end

  private
  
  attr_reader :value

  def add(val)
    @previous_value = @value
    @value += val
  end

  def subtract(val)
    @previous_value = @value
    @value -= val
  end

  def get_previous_value
    @previous_value
  end
end
```

#### Alternative approach

> To provide extra flexibility in handling signals and queries (especially from external classes and

Reviewer 5: I'm in favor of the the pattern above instead of the one below if possible. I've been able to compare workflow authors' use of the above approach in Java with the below in temporal-ruby since we support both equally at Stripe. I've seen more confusion leading to code defects with the callback-based approach. Mainly authors don't know when they should register their signal handler, and by not understanding that the code is not truly multithreaded. The above approach solves the first problem well, by taking way this unnecessary control. I've yet to find a case where registering a callback later is necessary. The second problem remains but seems to be less confusing because receipt of signals is less intertwined with their "main" code.

This got bad enough that we ended up eventually banning the below approach, abstracting over it in favor of an approach similar to that of the Go SDK. That is another option to consider here potentially as well if you do want to offer an inline approach. It ends up looking something like:

```
  queue = workflow.get_signal_queue(:foo)
  signal = queue.receive # blocks indefinitely
  signal = queue.receive(timeout: 60) # blocking with timeout, raises on timeout
  maybe_signal = queue.receive_now # returns nil if there is no signal available
  queue.empty? # true if there are no signals
```

However, there's not an obvious way to inline queries like this.

Reviewer 2: I believe the full team agrees with you here. While our examples and suggestions will be the explicit methods over callbacks, we still often need the callbacks to exist for dynamic registration based on input. So I think both being present with strong emphasis on the method-based approach is ideal (and what Python does).

Author: The main purpose for the alternative approach here is to provide the flexibility of extending the behaviour:

```ruby
class MyWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    ExecutionTimeQueryHandler.track(workflow) do
       ...
    end
  end
end

class ExecutionTimeQueryHandler
  def self.track(workflow, &block)
    @start_time = workflow.now
    workflow.on_signal(:get_time) { workflow.now - @time }
    block.call
  end
end
```

But this is more of an "advanced usage" rather than the default approach we'd recommend

methods) we will allow to define signals and queries from the workflow context:

```ruby
class CalculatorWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    value = 0

    workflow.on_signal(:add) do |val|
      value += val
    end

    workflow.on_signal('my.signal.subtract') do |val|
      value -= val
    end

    workflow.on_query(:value) do
      value
    end

    # A condition block will pause until the enclosed statement returns true
    async.await_for { value >= 42 }
  end
end
```

## Signal and query a workflow

```ruby
require 'calculator_workflow'

connection = Temporal::Connection.connect('localhost:7233')
client = Temporal::Client.new(connection, namespace: 'demo')

> handle = client.start_workflow(SumWorkflow, 1, 2, id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

Reviewer 5: What about signal-to-start/start-with-signal functionality? I recall there being some design discussions of this in temporal-ruby since the optimal API was non-obvious at first

Reviewer 2: :+1: Should specify here in proposal. What we do in most SDKs is have a separate client method, but in Python we realized this was cleaner just making the start signal and start signal args as params to the regular start call.

Author: I think params to the `#start_workflow` call make the most sense, especially since the signature of the method is identical otherwise. I think this is also getting into more details than the lightweight proposal was meant for :)

handle.signal(:add, 34)
handle.query(:get_value) # => 34
handle.signal(:subtract, 4) # This will send a 'my.signal.subtract' signal as defined
handle.query(:get_value) # => 30
handle.signal(:add, 12)
handle.query(:get_value) # => 42
```

Performing these operations on a child workflow looks very similar:

```ruby
class ParentWorkflow < Temporal::Workflow
  def execute
    # Note that we're using #start_workflow here instead of an #execute_workflow to
    #   obtain a handle rather than a result
    handle = workflow.start_workflow(SumWorkflow, 1, 2, id: 'id-1', task_queue: 'demo')

    # All these calls are blocking, but can be executed in an async block
    handle.signal(:add, 34)
    handle.signal(:subtract, 4) # This will send a 'my.signal.subtract' signal as defined
    handle.signal(:add, 12)

    # Block until workflow finishes
    handle.result
  end
end
```

## Extensibility

To allow extending existing classes with the workflow code without passing workflow context
explicitly we will expose a module with all the necessary mixins:

```ruby
require 'temporal/workflow/concern'

class MyClass

>   include Temporal::Workflow::Concern

Reviewer 5: Have you instead considered providing something like `DynamicWorkflow` and `DynamicActivity` from other SDKs for extensibility instead? I've found this to be very powerful in Java

Reviewer 2: Those are a different type of extensibility than this.

This provides workflow primitives in non-workflow code so you can build workflow libraries/helpers/mixins.

What you are talking about wrt `DynamicWorkflow`/`DynamicActivity` from Java is the ability to catch unregistered workflows/activities in catch-all implementations. While this is often useful, we haven't built it in many places besides Java, but it'd be fairly easy to build.

Author: Agree with Chad that this is a different type of extensibility.

I think that `DynamicWorkflow` and `DynamicActivity` are best implemented using interceptors (aka middleware) — you'd catch a `WorkflowNotFound` / `ActivityNotFound` error and handle it via a dedicated class. This way we don't need a special concept for this use-case and allow for many others.

## Defining an activity

> Activities are defined as classes ([a very common practice](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html)

Reviewer 2: 🇺🇸! :-)
